BUILD FIRST, MEASURE COMPREHENSIVELY

This is a continuation of "AI Agent Evaluation: Build First, Decide Later"
https://vladpovarna.substack.com/p/ai-agent-evaluation-build-first-decide


THE SCORE INTERPRETATION PROBLEM

Your evaluation says the judge is performing well. Production says users are unhappy. Which
one is wrong?

You've built judges, tuned prompts, collected 150 human annotations, and computed Kendall's
τ. The result: 0.4. Is that good? Should you deploy? The number alone tells you correlation
exists, but not what your judges actually do wrong.

This is the interpretation gap: validation metrics produce numbers, but numbers without
context don't guide action.


THREE METRICS, THREE PERSPECTIVES

A single metric can pass validation while judges fail in practice.

Kendall's τ measures rank correlation—whether judges order responses the same way humans do.
A τ of 0.4 means moderate agreement, but it doesn't tell you which classes the judge
misclassifies, whether errors concentrate in one category, or what proportion of critical
errors (fail→pass) occur. Because pass/review/fail often produce tied rankings, τ penalizes
cases where multiple answers receive identical scores. A judge with τ = 0.4 could be safe
but imprecise, or dangerously biased with acceptable overall correlation.

Cohen's Kappa answers: how much better is the judge than random guessing with the same class
distribution? It catches judges that exploit class imbalance—always predicting "pass" on an
85% pass dataset achieves 85% accuracy; Kappa exposes this as zero real agreement.

The confusion matrix answers: where specifically does the judge fail? τ and Kappa tell you
something is wrong; the matrix tells you what.

Together: τ validates correlation. Kappa quantifies agreement beyond chance. The matrix
reveals what to fix.


A VALIDATION EXAMPLE

Here's output from 150 annotated samples, balanced 50 per class. These numbers represent a
well-tuned judge after several prompt iterations—real validation runs often look messier,
with τ in the 0.3–0.5 range and more off-diagonal errors before the prompt converges:

  passed: true
  total_records: 150
  threshold: 0.3

  correlation_metrics:
    kendalls_tau: 0.63
    interpretation: "Moderate to strong agreement"
    passed_threshold: true

  agreement_metrics:
    cohens_kappa: 0.91
    interpretation: "Almost perfect"

  confusion_matrix:

    Predicted →    fail    review    pass
    ─────────────────────────────────────
    Actual fail  │  49  │    1   │   0  │
    Actual review│   0  │   42   │   8  │
    Actual pass  │   0  │    0   │  50  │

  per_class_metrics:
    fail:   { precision: 1.00, recall: 0.98, f1: 0.99, support: 50 }
    pass:   { precision: 0.86, recall: 1.00, f1: 0.93, support: 50 }
    review: { precision: 0.98, recall: 0.84, f1: 0.90, support: 50 }

The diagonal is strong. Zero critical errors: no failures classified as passes, no passes
classified as failures. The judge caught 98% of actual failures and never incorrectly
cleared a bad response. Review class handling is weaker—eight review cases were classified
as pass, borderline responses where the judge was optimistic. These surface for human review
rather than silently approving bad answers.

Kappa at 0.91 confirms agreement far beyond chance. With balanced classes, random guessing
yields 33% accuracy; the judge achieves 94%.

τ at 0.63 is lower than Kappa—and that's expected. Kappa measures categorical agreement:
did the judge predict the right class? τ measures rank correlation: did the judge order
responses the same way humans did? When responses fall near class boundaries, confidence
scores produce ties. τ penalizes those ties conservatively, which is why it reads lower
even when categorical agreement is high.

What this doesn't show: the validation set is balanced (50/50/50). Real traffic might be 85%
pass, 10% review, 5% fail. Judge behavior under class imbalance is unknown. The eight
review→pass cases need manual inspection. If they share a pattern—short answers,
domain-specific ambiguity, formatting edge cases—the judge will fail consistently once real
traffic arrives.


PER-CLASS METRICS AND WHAT TO OPTIMIZE

Different error types have different costs. Per-class metrics make those costs explicit.

Precision answers: when the judge predicts this class, how often is it correct? For the fail
class, precision 1.0 means every response labeled "fail" was actually a failure—no good
responses incorrectly rejected.

Recall answers: of all actual instances of this class, how many did the judge catch? For the
fail class, recall 0.98 means the judge caught 98% of actual failures, missing only 2%.

F1 is the harmonic mean of both. It's the right summary when you can't sacrifice one for
the other.

The priorities differ by class:

Fail class: optimize recall first. Missing a failure means a bad response gets approved—
silent harm. A false alarm means a good response gets flagged for human review—safe,
recoverable. Be conservative. Target recall >= 0.95, then tune precision to reduce review
load.

Pass class: optimize recall, then precision. Rejecting good responses frustrates users and
erodes trust faster than extra review cases. Target recall >= 0.90, precision >= 0.85.

Review class: balance with F1. Review is inherently ambiguous. Borderline cases can
reasonably go either way. F1 >= 0.75 is a reasonable target; higher is not always achievable
without forcing the judge to commit on genuinely uncertain inputs.


WHY NOT MORE METRICS?

Several standard metrics were candidates:

Spearman's rho — Similar to Kendall's τ but less robust for ordinal data with ties.
Kendall's τ is the right choice here.

Pearson's r — Assumes linear relationships. Evaluation scores rarely have this property.

Matthews Correlation — Works well for binary classification and extends to multiclass,
though interpretation becomes harder operationally.

ROC AUC — Most useful when thresholds are tunable post-deployment. Verdict thresholds here
are fixed in configuration.

Expected Calibration Error — Measures whether confidence scores match actual probabilities.
Valuable but adds interpretation complexity without changing the core deployment decision.

Three metrics provide complementary perspectives without layering interpretation complexity.
The goal is actionable diagnosis, not exhaustive measurement.

---


GETTING JUDGES PRODUCTION-READY

Static validation is the starting point, not a certificate. Before deploying, you iterate.
Start with 150-200 samples covering diverse query types, answer qualities, and edge cases.
Annotate manually with explicit criteria—what makes a response a failure? Where is the
pass/review boundary? Inconsistent annotation criteria produce unreliable correlation signals
regardless of judge quality.

Run the judges on the same subset. Compute τ, Kappa, and the confusion matrix. The confusion
matrix tells you what to tune:

High fail→pass rate. Judges are optimistic. Sharpen the prompt: add explicit failure
criteria, include examples that should fail, raise the pass confidence threshold.

High pass→fail rate. Judges are pessimistic. Add explicit pass criteria, lower the fail
threshold.

Review class scattered. The borderline category is unclear. Add boundary examples and be
explicit about what makes a response ambiguous versus clearly good or bad.

Edit prompts in judges.yaml, re-run validation, check whether τ improved and the confusion
matrix diagonal strengthened. This loop typically converges in three to five iterations.

Deploy when: τ >= 0.3, fail→pass cells near zero, fail recall >= 0.90.

---


PRODUCTION: MONITORING VERDICT DISTRIBUTION

After deployment, the application receives conversation turns—evaluated by judges and written
to the database. Initially, you have no ground truth. You only have judge verdicts.

The first available signal is verdict distribution over time: what fraction of evaluations
result in pass, review, fail? If pre-deployment validation showed 60% pass / 25% review /
15% fail and early traffic shows similar proportions, the judges are likely working as
expected. Sustained drift in these ratios is the earliest automated indicator that something
changed.

A sustained increase in fail rate could mean agent quality degraded, a deployment introduced
regressions, or a shift in user population exposed edge cases the judges don't handle well.
Spikes—sharp increases within hours—typically indicate a deployment event. Gradual drift is
harder to read: query distribution may be shifting, or agent behavior may be slowly changing.

What verdict drift does not tell you: whether the judges or the agent caused the change. A
drop in pass rate has two equally valid explanations—the judges are no longer calibrated to
current response patterns, or the agent is producing worse answers. Verdict ratios alone
cannot distinguish between these.


THE LIMITS OF CROSS-JUDGE DISAGREEMENT

The instinct when monitoring is to look at disagreement between judges—if judges diverge on
a sample, treat it as a signal.

The problem is that judges measure fundamentally different things. A faithfulness judge
evaluates whether the answer is grounded in retrieved context. A correctness judge evaluates
whether the answer matches an expected output. These dimensions don't move together. High
disagreement between them is expected for certain response types—it's not drift.

Cross-judge disagreement is meaningful within a single quality dimension—multiple relevance
judges disagreeing signals something real. Across unlike judges measuring different axes,
it's noise.


WHEN DRIFT OCCURS: THE RESOLUTION PATH

Regardless of which signal triggered the alert, the resolution path is the same: human
evaluation.

Sample from the drift period, weighted toward the verdict categories that drifted. Have
annotators label it. Compute τ and the confusion matrix against the new annotations.

If τ dropped significantly compared to your pre-deployment baseline, the judges drifted.
Check per-class metrics against the original validation run to identify which judge failed.
Fix the prompts, re-validate, redeploy the configuration.

If τ is stable, the judges are working correctly. The agent changed. Cross-reference with
deployment logs. The performance shift is real and the judges are surfacing it accurately.

Query-answer similarity adds one diagnostic signal here. Compute embedding similarity between
incoming queries and your original validation set queries. If similarity is low, real traffic
has drifted far from the distribution the judges were validated on. The fix is not
recalibration—it's expanding validation coverage with annotations for the new query types.

This distinction matters: judge calibration failure and out-of-distribution failure look
similar in verdict ratios but require different responses.


THE ANNOTATION BOTTLENECK

Every monitoring path leads back to human annotation. Verdict drift requires annotation to
distinguish judge failure from agent failure. Prompt tuning requires annotation to measure
improvement.

Human annotation is expensive and slow. It doesn't scale with traffic volume. The practical
question is how to make each round targeted: label the cases that resolve the current
ambiguity, not a random sample.

Worth asking directly: can you get annotation without humans?

Implicit conversation signals carry evaluation signal without explicit labels. Did the user
ask the same question again? Did they rephrase? Did they explicitly correct the agent? These
patterns suggest inadequate answers. The signal is noisy—users rephrase for reasons
unrelated to answer quality—but it accumulates continuously with traffic.

Explicit in-band feedback is simpler: after an agent response, prompt the user: "Did this
answer your question?" The binary response becomes an annotation.

Neither replaces human annotation fully. But they change the economics—instead of periodic
annotation sprints triggered by drift alerts, you accumulate signal continuously. The labeled
dataset grows with traffic. The tradeoff is instrumentation cost and conversation friction.
For high-volume systems where annotation costs compound quickly, the exchange is worth
considering.


CONTINUOUS VALIDATION IS AN OPERATIONAL SYSTEM

Static validation—run once before deployment—answers one question: are judges calibrated on
this dataset?

Continuous validation—drift monitoring, periodic re-annotation, similarity tracking,
feedback collection—answers a harder question: do judges remain calibrated as the world
changes?

The implementation gap is significant. Static validation is a CI check. Continuous validation
is an operational system: instrumented conversation flows, scheduled annotation jobs,
correlation tracking over time, alerting on drift thresholds.

I don't have a fully automated solution to offer here. On every resolution path—judge drift,
agent degradation, out-of-distribution inputs—you eventually reach the same bottleneck: a
human looking at sampled responses and making judgments. The tooling in Themis is an attempt
to make that work as targeted and infrequent as possible, not to eliminate it.

Build the system knowing it requires occasional human input. Design the feedback loops to
minimize how often you need it. Don't confuse low annotation frequency with full automation.

Build first. Measure comprehensively. Monitor continuously.

---

Validation metrics and monitoring implementation available in Themis at
github.com/Terminus-Lab/themis
